---
layout: post
title:  "P, NP, and NP-hard Completeness"
date:   2024-04-27 00:58:00 +0800
tags: 
  - Completeness
categories:
  - math
---

## What is P Class of Problem？

A problem has a polynominal algorithm means that it can be solved in 
polynominal time with respect to the size of inputs. We also call the 
problem as P problem.

## Version of Problem

We have three version of problems. We consider problems where we have
one "cost" that we want to minimize.

- Optimization: Given a problem instance, find the minimum cost solution.
- Evaluation: Given a problem instance, find the cost of the min-cost solution.
- Recognition: Given a problem instance and an integer L, is there a solution 
with cost no greater than L?

Note that the third version requires only a "yes-no" answer. This makes the discussion
easier, and we will focus on Recognition problems. Depending on assumptions about the
cost function, it can be shown that the three problem formulations are equivalent.

## What is NP Class of Problem

Intuitively, this is the class of problems that given a problem instance and guess for 
a solution, we can verify in polynomial time, whether the guess is a correct solution.

### Polynomial verification of a solution

For a reconization problem, if we are given a guess of solution, we want to verify whether 
this solution can help us answer this problem.

If we can "doublecheck" that the guess is a solution of the problem in polynomial time, 
we say that we can verify the problem in polynomial time.

### Non-Deterministic Algorithm

Let's imagine an algorithm for reconization problem, it somehow come up with a solution which may be generated by a guess, and check the cost of solution is less than L.

Therefore the algorithm can be decomposed in two parts:
guessing and verifying

We call all problem instances for which answer is yes as **yes-instance** (There exists a solution of cost is less than L in a problem instance).

If a problem instance is a yes-instance, assuming we are good at guessing, we will find its solution with the first try, then we can solve the reconization in polynomial time:

$$
guessing + poly.verification.
$$

However we can use this algorithm to solve the non-yes-instance (there is no solution with cost is less than L), because we have no way to prove that there is no such solution.

### The NP Class

A problem belongs in Non-deterministic Polynomial class, if yes-solution of the problem can be verified in polynomial time.


## WWFs (Well-Formed Fomulas)

There are eight WFFs:
$$
\begin{array}{ll}
All \ A \ is \ B        &   x \ is \ A \\
no \ A \ is \ B \       &   x \ is \ not \ A \\
some \ A \ is \ B       &   x \ is \ y \\
some \ A \ is \ not \ B &   x \ is \ not \ y
\end{array}
$$

All the sentences not aforementioned are not WFFs.

### referfence

- [A Practical Introduction to NP Completeness - ucr](https://www.cs.ucr.edu/~michalis/COURSES/141/handouts/NP.html)
- [FormalLanguageTheory - matilde](https://www.its.caltech.edu/~matilde/FormalLanguageTheory.pdf)
